exploration of DANDI-hub using Do-EKS example (#90)
dandi/dandi-hub: doc/design/eks-jupyterhub.md

# Deployment of User Jupyterhubs with EKS

## Current Setup

Currently, we use an [Ansible
playbook](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_intro.html)
as the top level interface.  An admin first sets up an EC2 instance, and sets
some Amazon Web Services configuration, and then runs the playbook
against the EC2 instance. The playbook then creates all remaining Amazon
resources, uses [`kops`](https://kops.sigs.k8s.io/) to install and
configure Kubernetes, and then installs the official [Jupyterhub Helm
Chart](https://hub.jupyter.org/helm-chart/). DANDI users authenticate
with GitHub OAuth, and can create their own user-space `jupyterhub`
instances.

### Limitations

 - This approach cannot yet be fully automated, and requires administrator configuration in the AWS console.
 - The Ansible playbook is based on the [zero to jupyterhub](https://github.com/spacetelescope/z2jh-aws-ansible)
   approach used by the space-telescopes group, but this approach is no longer used upstream, and
   we currently have to maintain the whole Ansible playbook alone.
 - The majority of the complexity of this approach is the deployment and configuration of Kubernetes itself.

> 

Reviewer: Thanks @asmacdo.  This design doc is coming together nicely.

Satra mentioned the following features, but we should review the current set of features that are available with Ansible and add to this list. 

```suggestion

## Desired features
1. Spot pricing
1. Connection to DANDI for OAuth
1. Custom repositories - [GESIS](https://2i2c.org/blog/2022/gesis-2i2c-collaboration-update/)
1. Regular clean up of shared space
1. Persistent home directories with quotas

```

## Current Setup

Currently, we use an [Ansible
playbook](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_intro.html)
as the top level interface.  An admin first sets up an EC2 instance, and sets
some Amazon Web Services configuration, and then runs the playbook
against the EC2 instance. The playbook then creates all remaining Amazon
resources, uses [`kops`](https://kops.sigs.k8s.io/) to install and
configure Kubernetes, and then installs the official [Jupyterhub Helm
Chart](https://hub.jupyter.org/helm-chart/). DANDI users authenticate
with GitHub OAuth, and can create their own user-space `jupyterhub`
instances.

### Limitations

 - This approach cannot yet be fully automated, and requires administrator configuration in the AWS console.
 - The Ansible playbook is based on the [zero to jupyterhub](https://github.com/spacetelescope/z2jh-aws-ansible)
   approach used by the space-telescopes group, but this approach is no longer used upstream, and
   we currently have to maintain the whole Ansible playbook alone.
 - The majority of the complexity of this approach is the deployment and configuration of Kubernetes itself.

## Desired features

> 1. Spot pricing

Reviewer 2: What infrastructure-as-code mechanisms are available within the `Proposed Setup` to assist with spot pricing?

(Similarly, with routing/selection of instance types by the end user dependent on their work or preferences)

Author: Open question. TBD :)

> ## Desired features
> 1. Spot pricing
> 1. Connection to DANDI for OAuth
> 1. Custom repositories - [GESIS](https://2i2c.org/blog/2022/gesis-2i2c-collaboration-update/)
> 1. Regular clean up of shared space
> 1. Persistent home directories with quotas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Desired features

* Top priority

1. Environment/Compute
  1. Single hub with multiple groups that get allocated different resources*
  1. Bring/build your own image*
  1. Run other services on the Kubernetes layer that JupyterHub users can use
1. Costs
  1. Spot pricing (and more generally, minimize costs using any cloud feature)*
  1. Separate billing for each group
  1. Monitor access, storage, compute for each user and group
1. Storage
  1. Storage quotas*
  1. Persistent home directories
  1. Persistent shared directories
  1. Regular clean up of shared directories
1. Authentication
  1. Connection to DANDI for OAuth

```

Reviewer 3: quota controllable by user/group

Reviewer: Thank you.  I have updated my original comment.

## Proposed Setup

Amazon Solutions Architects have created and maintained a repository for
common use cases on top of AWS, and [multi-tennant user-space
Jupyterhub](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/building-multi-tenant-jupyterhub-platforms-on-amazon-eks/)
instances is one of them. The
[jupyerhub](https://github.com/awslabs/data-on-eks/tree/main/ai-ml/jupyterhub)
Terraform blueprint example is capable of starting an EKS instance and
deploying self-healing, auto-scaling user-space jupyterhub instances on
the fly.

### Component Technologies

> K8s Terminology - operators and controllers

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this means? Is there additional content under k8s operators and controllers that is missing?

#### Terraform

Terraform creates a Virtual Private Cluster, creates EKS cluster, and installs operators/controllers that manage each of the components.

#### Karpenter

Karpenter does the heavy lifting in this setup, it handles the auto-scaling via "just in time" provisioning of Kubernetes nodes to meet the needs of the users.
Karpenter currently only supports AWS, but it has [recently become a part of the Kubernetes SIG Autoscaling](https://github.com/kubernetes/org/issues/4258), which should affect governance and vendor neutrality.

Overview: https://www.cncf.io/blog/2023/06/26/kubernetes-workload-management-using-karpenter/

#### Grafana & Prometheus

Grafana and Prometheus are commonly used tools for metrics and monitoring with Kubernetes, and are included out-of-the-box.

## Work Needed, Gaps, Limitations, and Open Questions

> 1. The example blueprint can use `dummy` or `cognito`. We will need to

Reviewer 2: It would be great to understand the overhead of not being able to wire in via `cognito` services here? 

Since `cognito` does not support GitHub Oauth out-of-the-box, my understanding here is that some complexity would increase with the need to issue, encrypt, validate, refresh tokens, etc. per request. 

Curious to get your thoughts.

   investigate how to use OAuth via GitHub.
1. The examble includes "profiles" for Jupyterhub pod sizes and resource

>    utilization. We can define our own profiles, but will need to ensure

Reviewer 2: Do these "profiles" get modified in the jupyterhub Helm chart? or somewhere else?

Author: Heres where we do it currently: https://github.com/dandi/dandi-hub/blob/dandi/config.yaml.j2#L161-L210

Heres where it is done in the amazon demo: https://github.com/awslabs/data-on-eks/blob/main/ai-ml/jupyterhub/helm/jupyterhub/jupyterhub-values-dummy.yaml#L27

   that the resources work as intended.

## Possible Setup Alternatives

> TODO: Ansible or Bash instead of terraform

Reviewer 2: Was `eksctl` ruled out for setup here? If so, why?

Author: I was imagining that bash scripts would use eksctl. Did you have a different usage in mind?

Ansible has an eks module.that would hopefully do what Eksctl does.

https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/community/aws/eks_cluster_module.html#ansible-collections-community-aws-eks-cluster-module

Reviewer 2: I am still trying to understand why ansible is necessary then if you are just invoking `eksctl` via bash scripting. Could you provide more context here? 

e.g. are you planning to use ansible for testing? provisioning? both? What does ansible _with_ eksctl get us vs. just eksctl?
